docs/Documentation-NW.UnivariateForecaster.md, before:

# NW.UnivariateForecasting

**Author:** NW
**Email:** numbworks [AT] gmail [DOT] com

### Revision History

| <sub>Date</sub> | <sub>Author</sub> | <sub>Description</sub> |
|---|---|---|
| <sub>27.04.2020</sub> | <sub>NW</sub> | <sub>Created</sub> |
| <sub>28.11.2020</sub> | <sub>NW</sub> | <sub>Added new examples, re-organized the document.</sub> |
| <sub>04.12.2020</sub> | <sub>NW</sub> | <sub>Added examples of user-provided C and E.</sub> |
| <sub>06.12.2020</sub> | <sub>NW</sub> | <sub>Added "Saving and Loading" paragraph.</sub> |

### Introduction

*Time Series Forecasting* is a *machine learning* technique that aims to predict the next values in a time series when a subset of subsequent timestamped values is provided ("*sliding window*"). There is no other information available than the timestamp and the value itself.

For example, given the last six months of "*Total Monthly Sales USD*" of your company, you would like the machine to predict the amounts for the next x months. 

*Time Series Forecasting* is divided in *Univariate* and *Multivariate*. 
The first one can predict only one step ahead, while the second one can predict multiple steps ahead. 

As its name states, this library implements the univariate approach. 
A good definition of "*univariate*" could be"*[...] univariate refers to an expression, equation, function or polynomial of only one variable [...] which consists of observations on only a single characteristic or attribute.*"

### Example 1: Main Scenario 

In order to use the library, the first thing we need to do is to create a `SlidingWindow` object to host the time series, and the library provides a  `SlidingWindowManager` helper class that aids the process: 

```csharp
using System;
using System.Collections.Generic;
using System.Linq;
using NW.UnivariateForecasting;

/* ... */

string slidingWindowId = UnivariateForecastingComponents.DefaultIdCreationFunction.Invoke(); // SW{yyyyMMddhhmmsss}
string observationName = "Total Monthly Sales USD";
List<double> values = new[] { 58.50, 615.26, 659.84, 635.69, 612.27, 632.94 }.ToList();
uint steps = 1;
IntervalUnits intervalUnit = IntervalUnits.Months;
DateTime startDate = new DateTime(2019, 01, 31, 00, 00, 00);

ISlidingWindowManager slidingWindowManager = new SlidingWindowManager();
SlidingWindow slidingWindow
    = slidingWindowManager.Create(slidingWindowId, observationName, values, steps, intervalUnit, startDate);

IUnivariateForecaster forecaster = new UnivariateForecaster();
Observation observation = forecaster.Forecast(slidingWindow);

/* ... */
```

The `SlidingWindow` object will look like this:

| <sub>Id</sub> | <sub>ObservationName</sub> | <sub>Interval</sub> | <sub>Items</sub> | 
|---|---|---|---|
| <sub>SW20200803063734</sub> | <sub>Total Monthly Sales USD</sub> | <sub>6:Months:20190131:20190731:20190831:1:6</sub> | <sub>6</sub> |

which contains the following '6' `SlidingWindowItems`:

| <sub>Id</sub> | <sub>Interval</sub> | <sub>X_Actual</sub> | <sub>Y_Forecasted</sub> |
|---|---|---|---|
| <sub>1</sub> | <sub>20190131:20190228:20190331</sub> | <sub>58,5</sub> | <sub>615,26</sub> |
| <sub>2</sub> | <sub>20190228:20190331:20190430</sub> | <sub>615,26</sub> | <sub>659,84</sub> |
| <sub>3</sub> | <sub>20190331:20190430:20190531</sub> | <sub>659,84</sub> | <sub>635,69</sub> | 
| <sub>4</sub> | <sub>20190430:20190531:20190630</sub> | <sub>635,69</sub> | <sub>612,27</sub> |
| <sub>5</sub> | <sub>20190531:20190630:20190731</sub> | <sub>612,27</sub> | <sub>632,94</sub> |
| <sub>6</sub> | <sub>20190630:20190731:20190831</sub> | <sub>632,94</sub> | <sub>`[NULL]`</sub> |

Each `SlidingWindowItem` object has the following properties:

- `Id` is a sequential identifier (a number works fine in this case)
- `X_Actual` is the current amount
- `Y_Forecasted` is the next amount in the time series

The `Y_Forecasted` for the last `*Item` is `[NULL]` and it's the value we want to predict.

Once the `SlidingWindow` object is set, we are ready to perform the prediction itself by using the `UnivariateForecaster` class:

```csharp
/* ... */
IUnivariateForecaster forecaster = new UnivariateForecaster();
Observation observation = forecaster.Forecast(slidingWindow);
```

This will return an `Observation` object, which will look like the following:

| <sub>Name</sub> | <sub>Interval</sub> | <sub>X_Actual</sub> | <sub>C</sub> | <sub>E</sub> | <sub>Y_Forecasted</sub> | <sub>SlidingWindowId</sub> |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| <sub>Total Monthly Sales USD</sub> | <sub>1:Months:20190731:20190831:20190930:1:1</sub> | <sub>632,94</sub> | <sub>0,82</sub> | <sub>0,22</sub> | <sub>519,23</sub> | <sub>SW20200803063734</sub> |

The original time series was: `{ 58.50, 615.26, 659.84, 635.69, 612.27, 632.94 }`.
According to the univariate forecasting, the next value of the series will be: `519,23`.

### Example 2: Less is More?

If we do have only a list of values without any specific time stamps, one of the `SlidingWindowManager.Create()` overloads can create a dummy `SlidingWindow` around them for us:

```csharp
/* ... */
List<double> values = new[] { 58.50, 615.26, 659.84, 635.69, 612.27, 632.94 }.ToList();

ISlidingWindowManager slidingWindowManager = new SlidingWindowManager();
SlidingWindow slidingWindow = slidingWindowManager.Create(values);
IUnivariateForecaster forecaster = new UnivariateForecaster();
Observation observation = forecaster.Forecast(slidingWindow);
```
The dummy `SlidingWindow` will look like this:

| <sub>Id</sub> | <sub>ObservationName</sub> | <sub>Interval</sub> | <sub>Items</sub> | 
|---|---|---|---|
| <sub>Dummy Id</sub> | <sub>Dummy Observation</sub> | <sub>6:Months:20200101:20200701:20200801:1:6</sub> | <sub>6</sub> |

The dummy values can be customized in `UnivariateForecastingSettings`.

### Example 3: One, Two, Three, ...

If we can predict values for more than one step ahead, we can use `ForecastAndCombine` to recursively add each observation to the `SlidingWindow` and perform the forecasting on it:

```csharp
/* ... */
List<double> values = new[] { 58.50, 615.26, 659.84, 635.69, 612.27, 632.94 }.ToList();

ISlidingWindowManager slidingWindowManager = new SlidingWindowManager();
SlidingWindow slidingWindow = slidingWindowManager.Create(values);
IUnivariateForecaster forecaster = new UnivariateForecaster();
Observation observation = forecaster.Forecast(slidingWindow);

SlidingWindow newSlidingWindow = forecaster.ForecastAndCombine(slidingWindow, 3);
List<double> results = forecaster.ExtractXActualValues(newSlidingWindow);
```

The resulting `SlidingWindow` will contain the following '9' `SlidingWindowItems`:

| <sub>Id</sub> | <sub>Interval</sub> | <sub>X_Actual</sub> | <sub>Y_Forecasted</sub> |
|---|---|---|---|
| <sub>1</sub> | <sub>20200101:20200201:20200301</sub> | <sub>58,5</sub> | <sub>615,26</sub> |
| <sub>2</sub> | <sub>20200201:20200301:20200401</sub> | <sub>615,26</sub> | <sub>659,84</sub> |
| <sub>3</sub> | <sub>20200301:20200401:20200501</sub> | <sub>659,84</sub> | <sub>635,69</sub> | 
| <sub>4</sub> | <sub>20200401:20200501:20200601</sub> | <sub>635,69</sub> | <sub>612,27</sub> |
| <sub>5</sub> | <sub>20200501:20200601:20200701</sub> | <sub>612,27</sub> | <sub>632,94</sub> |
| <sub>6</sub> | <sub>20200601:20200701:20200801</sub> | <sub>632,94</sub> | <sub>519,23</sub> |
| <sub>7</sub> | <sub>20200701:20200801:20200901</sub> | <sub>519,23</sub> | <sub>457,08</sub> |
| <sub>8</sub> | <sub>20200801:20200901:20201001</sub> | <sub>457,08</sub> | <sub>420,63</sub> |
| <sub>9</sub> | <sub>20200901:20201001:20201101</sub> | <sub>420,63</sub> | <sub>`[NULL]`</sub> |

Obviously, the predictions will be quite on the pessimistic side.

The `ExtractXActualValues` method helps extracting the provided and the forecasted values in the same list for convenience, which in this case will look like this: `[58,5, 615,26, 659,84, 635,69, 612,27, 632,94, 519,23, 457,08, 420,63]`.

### Example 4: In a Hurry

If you are really in a hurry, you can predict the next value in a time series with only four lines of code:

```csharp
/* ... */
List<double> values = new[] { 58.50, 615.26, 659.84, 635.69, 612.27, 632.94 }.ToList();
IUnivariateForecaster forecaster = new UnivariateForecaster();
double nextValue = forecaster.ForecastNextValue(values);
```

This scenario hasn't been shows as the first one, because it was important to explain the forecasting together with the concept of `SlidingWindow` first.

### Example 5: Custom Coefficients?

The library offers the possibility to skip all the calculations and provide the C and E coefficients yourself:

```csharp
/* ... */
List<double> values = new[] { 58.50, 615.26, 659.84, 635.69, 612.27, 632.94 }.ToList();
IUnivariateForecaster forecaster = new UnivariateForecaster();
double pessimisticNextValue = forecaster.ForecastNextValue(values, C: 0.82, E: 0.00); // 519.01
double optimisticNextValue = forecaster.ForecastNextValue(values, C: 1.11, E: 0.22); // 702.78
```

If we take the last statement as reference, what the method does is: ```(632,94 * 1.11) + 0.22 = 702.78```.

### The Settings 

You can personalize the library settings by instantiating your own instance of the ```UnivariateForecastingSettings``` class:

```csharp
/* ... */
public UnivariateForecastingSettings(
            double forecastingDenominator,
            string dummyId,
            string dummyObservationName,
            DateTime dummyStartDate,
            uint dummySteps,
            IntervalUnits dummyIntervalUnit
        ) 
        { /* ... */ }
```

and the library dependencies by instantiating your own instance of the```UnivariateForecastingComponents``` class:

```csharp
/* ... */
public UnivariateForecastingComponents(
        ISlidingWindowManager slidingWindowManager,
        ISlidingWindowItemManager slidingWindowItemManager,
        IObservationManager observationManager,
        IIntervalManager intervalManager,
        IFileManager fileManager,
        Func<string> idCreationFunction,
        Func<double, double> roundingFunction,
        Action<string> loggingAction
    )
    { /* ... */ }
```
Both classes have a default constructor to improve usability ("Don't make me think!").


### Saving and Loading

The library allows you to save objects to files and load objects from them by using the JSON format for exchanging data. 

Below an example of the code required to save:

```csharp
/* ... */
List<double> values = new[] { 58.50, 615.26, 659.84, 635.69, 612.27, 632.94 }.ToList();

ISlidingWindowManager slidingWindowManager = new SlidingWindowManager();
SlidingWindow slidingWindow = slidingWindowManager.Create(values);
IUnivariateForecaster forecaster = new UnivariateForecaster();
forecaster.SaveSlidingWindowAsJson(slidingWindow, @"C:\SlidingWindow.json");

Observation observation = forecaster.Forecast(slidingWindow);
forecaster.SaveObservationAsJson(observation, @"C:\Observation.json");
```

Below an example of the code required to load:

```csharp
IUnivariateForecaster forecaster = new UnivariateForecaster();
SlidingWindow slidingWindow = forecaster.LoadSlidingWindowFromJson(@"C:\SlidingWindow.json");
Observation observation = forecaster.LoadObservationFromJson(@"C:\Observation.json");
```

Below an example of how a ```SlidingWindow``` object looks like in JSON format:

```json
{
    "Id": "Dummy Id",
    "ObservationName": "Dummy Observation",
    "Interval": {
        "Size": 6,
        "Unit": "Months",
        "StartDate": "2020-01-01",
        "EndDate": "2020-07-01",
        "TargetDate": "2020-08-01",
        "Steps": 1,
        "SubIntervals": 6
    },
    "Items": [
        {
            "Id": 1,
            "Interval": {
                "Size": 1,
                "Unit": "Months",
                "StartDate": "2020-01-01",
                "EndDate": "2020-02-01",
                "TargetDate": "2020-03-01",
                "Steps": 1,
                "SubIntervals": 1
            },
            "X_Actual": 58.5,
            "Y_Forecasted": 615.26
        },
        {
            "Id": 2,
            "Interval": {
                "Size": 1,
                "Unit": "Months",
                "StartDate": "2020-02-01",
                "EndDate": "2020-03-01",
                "TargetDate": "2020-04-01",
                "Steps": 1,
                "SubIntervals": 1
            },
            "X_Actual": 615.26,
            "Y_Forecasted": 659.84
        },
        {
            "Id": 3,
            "Interval": {
                "Size": 1,
                "Unit": "Months",
                "StartDate": "2020-03-01",
                "EndDate": "2020-04-01",
                "TargetDate": "2020-05-01",
                "Steps": 1,
                "SubIntervals": 1
            },
            "X_Actual": 659.84,
            "Y_Forecasted": 635.69
        },
        {
            "Id": 4,
            "Interval": {
                "Size": 1,
                "Unit": "Months",
                "StartDate": "2020-04-01",
                "EndDate": "2020-05-01",
                "TargetDate": "2020-06-01",
                "Steps": 1,
                "SubIntervals": 1
            },
            "X_Actual": 635.69,
            "Y_Forecasted": 612.27
        },
        {
            "Id": 5,
            "Interval": {
                "Size": 1,
                "Unit": "Months",
                "StartDate": "2020-05-01",
                "EndDate": "2020-06-01",
                "TargetDate": "2020-07-01",
                "Steps": 1,
                "SubIntervals": 1
            },
            "X_Actual": 612.27,
            "Y_Forecasted": 632.94
        },
        {
            "Id": 6,
            "Interval": {
                "Size": 1,
                "Unit": "Months",
                "StartDate": "2020-06-01",
                "EndDate": "2020-07-01",
                "TargetDate": "2020-08-01",
                "Steps": 1,
                "SubIntervals": 1
            },
            "X_Actual": 632.94,
            "Y_Forecasted": null
        }
    ]
}
```

Below an example of how a ```Observation``` object looks like in JSON format:

```json
{
    "Name": "Dummy Observation",
    "Interval": {
        "Size": 1,
        "Unit": "Months",
        "StartDate": "2020-07-01",
        "EndDate": "2020-08-01",
        "TargetDate": "2020-09-01",
        "Steps": 1,
        "SubIntervals": 1
    },
    "X_Actual": 632.94,
    "C": 0.82,
    "E": 0.22,
    "Y_Forecasted": 519.23,
    "SlidingWindowId": "Dummy Id"
}
```

### The Algorithm

Let's explain the algorithm on which the library is based by using an example.

This is our trusty `SlidingWindow`:

| <sub>Id</sub> | <sub>Interval</sub> | <sub>X_Actual</sub> | <sub>Y_Forecasted</sub> |
|---|---|---|---|
| <sub>1</sub> | <sub>20190131:20190228:20190331</sub> | <sub>58,5</sub> | <sub>615,26</sub> |
| <sub>2</sub> | <sub>20190228:20190331:20190430</sub> | <sub>615,26</sub> | <sub>659,84</sub> |
| <sub>3</sub> | <sub>20190331:20190430:20190531</sub> | <sub>659,84</sub> | <sub>635,69</sub> | 
| <sub>4</sub> | <sub>20190430:20190531:20190630</sub> | <sub>635,69</sub> | <sub>612,27</sub> |
| <sub>5</sub> | <sub>20190531:20190630:20190731</sub> | <sub>612,27</sub> | <sub>632,94</sub> |
| <sub>6</sub> | <sub>20190630:20190731:20190831</sub> | <sub>632,94</sub> | <sub>`[NULL]`</sub> |

The first thing we do is to divide each `X_Actual` for the corresponding `Y_Forecasted`:

| <sub>Id</sub> | <sub>XByY</sub>  |
|---|---|
| <sub>1</sub> | <sub>0,1</sub> |
| <sub>2</sub> | <sub>0,93</sub> |
| <sub>3</sub> | <sub>1,04</sub> |
| <sub>4</sub> | <sub>1,04</sub> |
| <sub>5</sub> | <sub>0,97</sub> |

Then, we do calculate C by averaging all the values in the `XByY` column:

| <sub>C</sub> |
|---|
| <sub>0,82</sub> |

At this point, we do substract `C` from each values in `XByY`:

| <sub>Id</sub> | <sub>(XByY)-C</sub>  |
|---|---|
| <sub>1</sub> | <sub>-0,72</sub> |
| <sub>2</sub> | <sub>0,11</sub> |
| <sub>3</sub> | <sub>0,22</sub> |
| <sub>4</sub> | <sub>0,22</sub> |
| <sub>5</sub> | <sub>0,15</sub> |

Calculating the MODE of `(XByY)-C` will return the error `E`:

| <sub>E</sub> |
|---|
| <sub>0,22</sub> |

The function to forecast the next value in the series is `Y=F(X)+E`, which can be expressed as `Y=CX+E`, where X is the actual value. Now that we have both `C` and `E`, it's just a matter of replacing them in the equation to obtain the `Y_Forecasted` value we are looking for:

| <sub>Y_Forecasted</sub> |
|---|
| <sub>519,23</sub> |

### Markdown Toolset

Suggested toolset to view and edit this Markdown file:

- [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/)
- [Markdown Preview Enhanced](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=shd101wyy.markdown-preview-enhanced)
- [Markdown PDF](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=yzane.markdown-pdf)

Commit message:

Documentation-NW.UnivariateForecaster.md: Changed font size and date format in Revision History.

docs/Documentation-NW.UnivariateForecaster.md, after:

# NW.UnivariateForecasting
Contact: numbworks@gmail.com

## Revision History

| Date | Author | Description |
|---|---|---|
| 2020-04-27 | numbworks | Created. |
| 2020-11-28 | numbworks | Added new examples, re-organized the document. |
| 2020-12-04 | numbworks | Added examples of user-provided C and E. |
| 2020-12-06 | numbworks | Added "Saving and Loading" paragraph. |
| 2020-12-22 | numbworks | Changed font size and date format in Revision History. |

## Introduction

*Time Series Forecasting* is a *machine learning* technique that aims to predict the next values in a time series when a subset of subsequent timestamped values is provided ("*sliding window*"). There is no other information available than the timestamp and the value itself.

For example, given the last six months of "*Total Monthly Sales USD*" of your company, you would like the machine to predict the amounts for the next x months. 

*Time Series Forecasting* is divided in *Univariate* and *Multivariate*. 
The first one can predict only one step ahead, while the second one can predict multiple steps ahead. 

As its name states, this library implements the univariate approach. 
A good definition of "*univariate*" could be"*[...] univariate refers to an expression, equation, function or polynomial of only one variable [...] which consists of observations on only a single characteristic or attribute.*"

## Example 1: Main Scenario 

In order to use the library, the first thing we need to do is to create a `SlidingWindow` object to host the time series, and the library provides a  `SlidingWindowManager` helper class that aids the process: 

```csharp
using System;
using System.Collections.Generic;
using System.Linq;
using NW.UnivariateForecasting;

/* ... */

string slidingWindowId = UnivariateForecastingComponents.DefaultIdCreationFunction.Invoke(); // SW{yyyyMMddhhmmsss}
string observationName = "Total Monthly Sales USD";
List<double> values = new[] { 58.50, 615.26, 659.84, 635.69, 612.27, 632.94 }.ToList();
uint steps = 1;
IntervalUnits intervalUnit = IntervalUnits.Months;
DateTime startDate = new DateTime(2019, 01, 31, 00, 00, 00);

ISlidingWindowManager slidingWindowManager = new SlidingWindowManager();
SlidingWindow slidingWindow
    = slidingWindowManager.Create(slidingWindowId, observationName, values, steps, intervalUnit, startDate);

IUnivariateForecaster forecaster = new UnivariateForecaster();
Observation observation = forecaster.Forecast(slidingWindow);

/* ... */
```

The `SlidingWindow` object will look like this:

| <sub>Id</sub> | <sub>ObservationName</sub> | <sub>Interval</sub> | <sub>Items</sub> | 
|---|---|---|---|
| <sub>SW20200803063734</sub> | <sub>Total Monthly Sales USD</sub> | <sub>6:Months:20190131:20190731:20190831:1:6</sub> | <sub>6</sub> |

which contains the following '6' `SlidingWindowItems`:

| <sub>Id</sub> | <sub>Interval</sub> | <sub>X_Actual</sub> | <sub>Y_Forecasted</sub> |
|---|---|---|---|
| <sub>1</sub> | <sub>20190131:20190228:20190331</sub> | <sub>58,5</sub> | <sub>615,26</sub> |
| <sub>2</sub> | <sub>20190228:20190331:20190430</sub> | <sub>615,26</sub> | <sub>659,84</sub> |
| <sub>3</sub> | <sub>20190331:20190430:20190531</sub> | <sub>659,84</sub> | <sub>635,69</sub> | 
| <sub>4</sub> | <sub>20190430:20190531:20190630</sub> | <sub>635,69</sub> | <sub>612,27</sub> |
| <sub>5</sub> | <sub>20190531:20190630:20190731</sub> | <sub>612,27</sub> | <sub>632,94</sub> |
| <sub>6</sub> | <sub>20190630:20190731:20190831</sub> | <sub>632,94</sub> | <sub>`[NULL]`</sub> |

Each `SlidingWindowItem` object has the following properties:

- `Id` is a sequential identifier (a number works fine in this case)
- `X_Actual` is the current amount
- `Y_Forecasted` is the next amount in the time series

The `Y_Forecasted` for the last `*Item` is `[NULL]` and it's the value we want to predict.

Once the `SlidingWindow` object is set, we are ready to perform the prediction itself by using the `UnivariateForecaster` class:

```csharp
/* ... */
IUnivariateForecaster forecaster = new UnivariateForecaster();
Observation observation = forecaster.Forecast(slidingWindow);
```

This will return an `Observation` object, which will look like the following:

| <sub>Name</sub> | <sub>Interval</sub> | <sub>X_Actual</sub> | <sub>C</sub> | <sub>E</sub> | <sub>Y_Forecasted</sub> | <sub>SlidingWindowId</sub> |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| <sub>Total Monthly Sales USD</sub> | <sub>1:Months:20190731:20190831:20190930:1:1</sub> | <sub>632,94</sub> | <sub>0,82</sub> | <sub>0,22</sub> | <sub>519,23</sub> | <sub>SW20200803063734</sub> |

The original time series was: `{ 58.50, 615.26, 659.84, 635.69, 612.27, 632.94 }`.
According to the univariate forecasting, the next value of the series will be: `519,23`.

## Example 2: Less is More?

If we do have only a list of values without any specific time stamps, one of the `SlidingWindowManager.Create()` overloads can create a dummy `SlidingWindow` around them for us:

```csharp
/* ... */
List<double> values = new[] { 58.50, 615.26, 659.84, 635.69, 612.27, 632.94 }.ToList();

ISlidingWindowManager slidingWindowManager = new SlidingWindowManager();
SlidingWindow slidingWindow = slidingWindowManager.Create(values);
IUnivariateForecaster forecaster = new UnivariateForecaster();
Observation observation = forecaster.Forecast(slidingWindow);
```
The dummy `SlidingWindow` will look like this:

| <sub>Id</sub> | <sub>ObservationName</sub> | <sub>Interval</sub> | <sub>Items</sub> | 
|---|---|---|---|
| <sub>Dummy Id</sub> | <sub>Dummy Observation</sub> | <sub>6:Months:20200101:20200701:20200801:1:6</sub> | <sub>6</sub> |

The dummy values can be customized in `UnivariateForecastingSettings`.

## Example 3: One, Two, Three, ...

If we can predict values for more than one step ahead, we can use `ForecastAndCombine` to recursively add each observation to the `SlidingWindow` and perform the forecasting on it:

```csharp
/* ... */
List<double> values = new[] { 58.50, 615.26, 659.84, 635.69, 612.27, 632.94 }.ToList();

ISlidingWindowManager slidingWindowManager = new SlidingWindowManager();
SlidingWindow slidingWindow = slidingWindowManager.Create(values);
IUnivariateForecaster forecaster = new UnivariateForecaster();
Observation observation = forecaster.Forecast(slidingWindow);

SlidingWindow newSlidingWindow = forecaster.ForecastAndCombine(slidingWindow, 3);
List<double> results = forecaster.ExtractXActualValues(newSlidingWindow);
```

The resulting `SlidingWindow` will contain the following '9' `SlidingWindowItems`:

| <sub>Id</sub> | <sub>Interval</sub> | <sub>X_Actual</sub> | <sub>Y_Forecasted</sub> |
|---|---|---|---|
| <sub>1</sub> | <sub>20200101:20200201:20200301</sub> | <sub>58,5</sub> | <sub>615,26</sub> |
| <sub>2</sub> | <sub>20200201:20200301:20200401</sub> | <sub>615,26</sub> | <sub>659,84</sub> |
| <sub>3</sub> | <sub>20200301:20200401:20200501</sub> | <sub>659,84</sub> | <sub>635,69</sub> | 
| <sub>4</sub> | <sub>20200401:20200501:20200601</sub> | <sub>635,69</sub> | <sub>612,27</sub> |
| <sub>5</sub> | <sub>20200501:20200601:20200701</sub> | <sub>612,27</sub> | <sub>632,94</sub> |
| <sub>6</sub> | <sub>20200601:20200701:20200801</sub> | <sub>632,94</sub> | <sub>519,23</sub> |
| <sub>7</sub> | <sub>20200701:20200801:20200901</sub> | <sub>519,23</sub> | <sub>457,08</sub> |
| <sub>8</sub> | <sub>20200801:20200901:20201001</sub> | <sub>457,08</sub> | <sub>420,63</sub> |
| <sub>9</sub> | <sub>20200901:20201001:20201101</sub> | <sub>420,63</sub> | <sub>`[NULL]`</sub> |

Obviously, the predictions will be quite on the pessimistic side.

The `ExtractXActualValues` method helps extracting the provided and the forecasted values in the same list for convenience, which in this case will look like this: `[58,5, 615,26, 659,84, 635,69, 612,27, 632,94, 519,23, 457,08, 420,63]`.

### Example 4: In a Hurry

If you are really in a hurry, you can predict the next value in a time series with only four lines of code:

```csharp
/* ... */
List<double> values = new[] { 58.50, 615.26, 659.84, 635.69, 612.27, 632.94 }.ToList();
IUnivariateForecaster forecaster = new UnivariateForecaster();
double nextValue = forecaster.ForecastNextValue(values);
```

This scenario hasn't been shows as the first one, because it was important to explain the forecasting together with the concept of `SlidingWindow` first.

## Example 5: Custom Coefficients?

The library offers the possibility to skip all the calculations and provide the C and E coefficients yourself:

```csharp
/* ... */
List<double> values = new[] { 58.50, 615.26, 659.84, 635.69, 612.27, 632.94 }.ToList();
IUnivariateForecaster forecaster = new UnivariateForecaster();
double pessimisticNextValue = forecaster.ForecastNextValue(values, C: 0.82, E: 0.00); // 519.01
double optimisticNextValue = forecaster.ForecastNextValue(values, C: 1.11, E: 0.22); // 702.78
```

If we take the last statement as reference, what the method does is: ```(632,94 * 1.11) + 0.22 = 702.78```.

## The Settings 

You can personalize the library settings by instantiating your own instance of the ```UnivariateForecastingSettings``` class:

```csharp
/* ... */
public UnivariateForecastingSettings(
            double forecastingDenominator,
            string dummyId,
            string dummyObservationName,
            DateTime dummyStartDate,
            uint dummySteps,
            IntervalUnits dummyIntervalUnit
        ) 
        { /* ... */ }
```

and the library dependencies by instantiating your own instance of the```UnivariateForecastingComponents``` class:

```csharp
/* ... */
public UnivariateForecastingComponents(
        ISlidingWindowManager slidingWindowManager,
        ISlidingWindowItemManager slidingWindowItemManager,
        IObservationManager observationManager,
        IIntervalManager intervalManager,
        IFileManager fileManager,
        Func<string> idCreationFunction,
        Func<double, double> roundingFunction,
        Action<string> loggingAction
    )
    { /* ... */ }
```
Both classes have a default constructor to improve usability ("Don't make me think!").


## Saving and Loading

The library allows you to save objects to files and load objects from them by using the JSON format for exchanging data. 

Below an example of the code required to save:

```csharp
/* ... */
List<double> values = new[] { 58.50, 615.26, 659.84, 635.69, 612.27, 632.94 }.ToList();

ISlidingWindowManager slidingWindowManager = new SlidingWindowManager();
SlidingWindow slidingWindow = slidingWindowManager.Create(values);
IUnivariateForecaster forecaster = new UnivariateForecaster();
forecaster.SaveSlidingWindowAsJson(slidingWindow, @"C:\SlidingWindow.json");

Observation observation = forecaster.Forecast(slidingWindow);
forecaster.SaveObservationAsJson(observation, @"C:\Observation.json");
```

Below an example of the code required to load:

```csharp
IUnivariateForecaster forecaster = new UnivariateForecaster();
SlidingWindow slidingWindow = forecaster.LoadSlidingWindowFromJson(@"C:\SlidingWindow.json");
Observation observation = forecaster.LoadObservationFromJson(@"C:\Observation.json");
```

Below an example of how a ```SlidingWindow``` object looks like in JSON format:

```json
{
    "Id": "Dummy Id",
    "ObservationName": "Dummy Observation",
    "Interval": {
        "Size": 6,
        "Unit": "Months",
        "StartDate": "2020-01-01",
        "EndDate": "2020-07-01",
        "TargetDate": "2020-08-01",
        "Steps": 1,
        "SubIntervals": 6
    },
    "Items": [
        {
            "Id": 1,
            "Interval": {
                "Size": 1,
                "Unit": "Months",
                "StartDate": "2020-01-01",
                "EndDate": "2020-02-01",
                "TargetDate": "2020-03-01",
                "Steps": 1,
                "SubIntervals": 1
            },
            "X_Actual": 58.5,
            "Y_Forecasted": 615.26
        },
        {
            "Id": 2,
            "Interval": {
                "Size": 1,
                "Unit": "Months",
                "StartDate": "2020-02-01",
                "EndDate": "2020-03-01",
                "TargetDate": "2020-04-01",
                "Steps": 1,
                "SubIntervals": 1
            },
            "X_Actual": 615.26,
            "Y_Forecasted": 659.84
        },
        {
            "Id": 3,
            "Interval": {
                "Size": 1,
                "Unit": "Months",
                "StartDate": "2020-03-01",
                "EndDate": "2020-04-01",
                "TargetDate": "2020-05-01",
                "Steps": 1,
                "SubIntervals": 1
            },
            "X_Actual": 659.84,
            "Y_Forecasted": 635.69
        },
        {
            "Id": 4,
            "Interval": {
                "Size": 1,
                "Unit": "Months",
                "StartDate": "2020-04-01",
                "EndDate": "2020-05-01",
                "TargetDate": "2020-06-01",
                "Steps": 1,
                "SubIntervals": 1
            },
            "X_Actual": 635.69,
            "Y_Forecasted": 612.27
        },
        {
            "Id": 5,
            "Interval": {
                "Size": 1,
                "Unit": "Months",
                "StartDate": "2020-05-01",
                "EndDate": "2020-06-01",
                "TargetDate": "2020-07-01",
                "Steps": 1,
                "SubIntervals": 1
            },
            "X_Actual": 612.27,
            "Y_Forecasted": 632.94
        },
        {
            "Id": 6,
            "Interval": {
                "Size": 1,
                "Unit": "Months",
                "StartDate": "2020-06-01",
                "EndDate": "2020-07-01",
                "TargetDate": "2020-08-01",
                "Steps": 1,
                "SubIntervals": 1
            },
            "X_Actual": 632.94,
            "Y_Forecasted": null
        }
    ]
}
```

Below an example of how a ```Observation``` object looks like in JSON format:

```json
{
    "Name": "Dummy Observation",
    "Interval": {
        "Size": 1,
        "Unit": "Months",
        "StartDate": "2020-07-01",
        "EndDate": "2020-08-01",
        "TargetDate": "2020-09-01",
        "Steps": 1,
        "SubIntervals": 1
    },
    "X_Actual": 632.94,
    "C": 0.82,
    "E": 0.22,
    "Y_Forecasted": 519.23,
    "SlidingWindowId": "Dummy Id"
}
```

## The Algorithm

Let's explain the algorithm on which the library is based by using an example.

This is our trusty `SlidingWindow`:

| <sub>Id</sub> | <sub>Interval</sub> | <sub>X_Actual</sub> | <sub>Y_Forecasted</sub> |
|---|---|---|---|
| <sub>1</sub> | <sub>20190131:20190228:20190331</sub> | <sub>58,5</sub> | <sub>615,26</sub> |
| <sub>2</sub> | <sub>20190228:20190331:20190430</sub> | <sub>615,26</sub> | <sub>659,84</sub> |
| <sub>3</sub> | <sub>20190331:20190430:20190531</sub> | <sub>659,84</sub> | <sub>635,69</sub> | 
| <sub>4</sub> | <sub>20190430:20190531:20190630</sub> | <sub>635,69</sub> | <sub>612,27</sub> |
| <sub>5</sub> | <sub>20190531:20190630:20190731</sub> | <sub>612,27</sub> | <sub>632,94</sub> |
| <sub>6</sub> | <sub>20190630:20190731:20190831</sub> | <sub>632,94</sub> | <sub>`[NULL]`</sub> |

The first thing we do is to divide each `X_Actual` for the corresponding `Y_Forecasted`:

| <sub>Id</sub> | <sub>XByY</sub>  |
|---|---|
| <sub>1</sub> | <sub>0,1</sub> |
| <sub>2</sub> | <sub>0,93</sub> |
| <sub>3</sub> | <sub>1,04</sub> |
| <sub>4</sub> | <sub>1,04</sub> |
| <sub>5</sub> | <sub>0,97</sub> |

Then, we do calculate C by averaging all the values in the `XByY` column:

| <sub>C</sub> |
|---|
| <sub>0,82</sub> |

At this point, we do substract `C` from each values in `XByY`:

| <sub>Id</sub> | <sub>(XByY)-C</sub>  |
|---|---|
| <sub>1</sub> | <sub>-0,72</sub> |
| <sub>2</sub> | <sub>0,11</sub> |
| <sub>3</sub> | <sub>0,22</sub> |
| <sub>4</sub> | <sub>0,22</sub> |
| <sub>5</sub> | <sub>0,15</sub> |

Calculating the MODE of `(XByY)-C` will return the error `E`:

| <sub>E</sub> |
|---|
| <sub>0,22</sub> |

The function to forecast the next value in the series is `Y=F(X)+E`, which can be expressed as `Y=CX+E`, where X is the actual value. Now that we have both `C` and `E`, it's just a matter of replacing them in the equation to obtain the `Y_Forecasted` value we are looking for:

| <sub>Y_Forecasted</sub> |
|---|
| <sub>519,23</sub> |

## Markdown Toolset

Suggested toolset to view and edit this Markdown file:

- [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/)
- [Markdown Preview Enhanced](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=shd101wyy.markdown-preview-enhanced)
- [Markdown PDF](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=yzane.markdown-pdf)
